README.md, before:

# Personal Dotfiles

A modern, performance-optimized development environment setup featuring a blazing-fast shell configuration and a modular Neovim setup.

## 🚀 Quick Setup

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone <your-repo-url> ~/.dotfiles

# Link configurations
ln -sf ~/.dotfiles/.zshrc ~/.zshrc
ln -sf ~/.dotfiles/nvim ~/.config/nvim

# Install dependencies
brew install starship fzf
```

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
~/.dotfiles/
├── .zshrc                      # Optimized Zsh configuration with Starship
├── .zshrc.secrets              # Private environment variables (gitignored)
├── nvim/                       # Neovim configuration
│   ├── init.lua                # Main entry point
│   ├── lazy-lock.json          # Plugin version lockfile
│   └── lua/
│       ├── config/             # Core Neovim configuration
│       │   ├── options.lua     # Vim settings and options
│       │   ├── keymaps.lua     # Global keymaps
│       │   └── autocmds.lua    # Autocommands
│       └── plugins/            # Individual plugin configurations
│           ├── lsp.lua         # Language Server Protocol setup
│           ├── telescope.lua   # Fuzzy finder configuration
│           ├── completion.lua  # Autocompletion setup
│           ├── treesitter.lua  # Syntax highlighting
│           ├── dashboard.lua   # Start screen
│           ├── avante.lua      # AI coding assistant
│           ├── dap.lua         # Debug Adapter Protocol
│           └── ...             # 25+ other plugin configs
└── README.md                   # This file
```

## ⚡ Shell Configuration (.zshrc)

### Key Features
- **NVM with .nvmrc auto-switching**: Automatically switches Node versions
- **Comprehensive autocompletion**: AWS CLI, Terraform, Git, npm, and more
- **FZF integration**: Fuzzy finding for files and command history
- **Amazon Q integration**: Built-in AI assistant support

### Tools & Completions
- **AWS CLI**: Full autocompletion support
- **Terraform**: Command and resource completion
- **Git**: Full command completion (no aliases - using LazyGit instead)
- **Node/npm/bun**: Package and script completion
- **Tenv**: Terraform version management

## 🎨 Neovim Configuration

### Philosophy: Custom LazyVim-Inspired Setup

This is a **custom Neovim configuration** inspired by [LazyVim](https://lazyvim.org) but built from the ground up for complete control and transparency. 

**Why custom instead of LazyVim?**
- 🎯 **Full control**: Every plugin and setting is explicit and customizable
- 🔍 **Transparency**: No hidden configurations or magic - you see exactly what's loaded
- ⚡ **Performance**: Only the features you actually use, no bloat
- 🛠️ **Maintainability**: Individual plugin files make debugging and modifications easier
- 🎨 **Aesthetics**: Preserves LazyVim's beautiful UI (dashboard, noice, etc.) without the framework overhead

### Architecture
Modern Neovim setup using **Lazy.nvim** plugin manager with individual plugin files for better organization and maintainability. Each plugin is configured in its own file, making the setup modular and easy to understand.

### Core Features

#### 🎯 Language Support
- **LSP Integration**: Full Language Server Protocol support
- **Autocompletion**: Fast completion with blink.cmp
- **Syntax Highlighting**: TreeSitter for accurate highlighting
- **Code Formatting**: Conform.nvim with multiple formatters
- **Debugging**: DAP (Debug Adapter Protocol) support

#### 🔍 Navigation & Search
- **Telescope**: Fuzzy finder for files, symbols, and more
- **Neo-tree**: Modern file explorer
- **Which-key**: Interactive keybinding hints
- **Trouble**: Beautiful diagnostics and quickfix lists

#### 🤖 AI Integration
- **Avante**: AI coding assistant for code generation and chat
- **Amazon Q**: Integrated development assistant

#### 🛠️ Development Tools
- **LazyGit**: Terminal UI for Git operations
- **Terminal**: Integrated terminal management
- **Script Runner**: Custom plugin for running project scripts
- **Session Management**: Automatic session persistence

#### 🎨 UI & Aesthetics
- **Kanagawa**: Beautiful colorscheme
- **Lualine**: Customizable statusline
- **Bufferline**: Enhanced buffer/tab management
- **Dashboard**: Personalized start screen
- **Noice**: Enhanced UI for messages and notifications

### Key Keymaps

#### Leader Key: `<Space>`

**File Operations**
- `<leader>ff` - Find files
- `<leader>fg` - Live grep
- `<leader>fb` - Find buffers
- `<leader>w` - Save file

**LSP & Coding**
- `gd` - Go to definition
- `gr` - Go to references
- `<leader>rn` - Rename symbol
- `<leader>ca` - Code actions
- `<leader>f` - Format buffer

**Git**
- `<leader>gg` - Open LazyGit
- `<leader>gs` - Git status
- `<leader>gb` - Git blame

**AI Assistant**
- `<leader>aa` - Open Avante chat
- `<leader>ae` - Avante edit
- `<leader>ar` - Avante refresh

**Navigation**
- `<C-h/j/k/l>` - Window navigation
- `<C-e>` - Toggle file tree
- `<leader>xx` - Toggle trouble

## 📊 Configuration Comparison

### Custom vs LazyVim vs Kickstart.nvim

| Feature | This Setup | LazyVim | Kickstart.nvim |
|---------|------------|---------|----------------|
| **Philosophy** | LazyVim-inspired, full control | Opinionated distribution | Minimal starting point |
| **Plugin Count** | ~25 explicit plugins | 50+ plugins (many hidden) | ~8 essential plugins |
| **Startup Time** | Fast (lazy loading) | Fast (lazy loading) | Fastest (minimal) |
| **Transparency** | ✅ Every plugin visible | ❌ Many plugins hidden | ✅ Everything explicit |
| **Customization** | ✅ Full control | ⚠️ Limited without overrides | ✅ Full control |
| **Maintenance** | ✅ Individual files | ❌ Framework updates | ✅ Manual updates |
| **Learning Curve** | Medium | Low | High |

### Feature Matrix

| Feature | This Setup | LazyVim | Kickstart.nvim |
|---------|:----------:|:-------:|:--------------:|
| **LSP Integration** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| **Autocompletion** | ✅ blink.cmp | ✅ nvim-cmp | ✅ nvim-cmp |
| **Fuzzy Finding** | ✅ Telescope | ✅ Telescope | ✅ Telescope |
| **File Explorer** | ✅ Neo-tree | ✅ Neo-tree | ❌ |
| **Git Integration** | ✅ LazyGit + gitsigns | ✅ LazyGit + gitsigns | ✅ gitsigns only |
| **Debugging (DAP)** | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
| **Testing** | ✅ Neotest | ✅ Neotest | ❌ |
| **AI Integration** | ✅ Avante + Amazon Q | ✅ Various | ❌ |
| **Beautiful UI** | ✅ Dashboard + Noice | ✅ Dashboard + Noice | ❌ |
| **Terminal** | ✅ Integrated | ✅ Integrated | ❌ |
| **Session Management** | ✅ Persistence | ✅ Persistence | ❌ |
| **Keybinding Hints** | ✅ Which-key | ✅ Which-key | ❌ |
| **Statusline** | ✅ Lualine | ✅ Lualine | ❌ |
| **Buffer Management** | ✅ Bufferline | ✅ Bufferline | ❌ |
| **Code Formatting** | ✅ Conform | ✅ Conform | ✅ |
| **Syntax Highlighting** | ✅ Treesitter | ✅ Treesitter | ✅ |

### Why This Approach?

**Advantages over LazyVim:**
- 🔍 **Complete transparency**: See exactly what's installed and configured
- 🎛️ **Granular control**: Modify any aspect without fighting the framework
- 📚 **Learning opportunity**: Understand how each piece works
- 🎨 **Aesthetic preservation**: Keep the beautiful UI without the hidden complexity
- ⚡ **Performance**: Only load what you actually need

**Advantages over Kickstart.nvim:**
- 🎨 **Rich UI**: Beautiful dashboard, notifications, and interface elements
- 🛠️ **Feature complete**: Debugging, testing, AI integration out of the box
- 💼 **Professional setup**: Ready for serious development work
- 🔧 **Advanced tooling**: Git UI, terminal integration, session management

**Trade-offs:**
- More complex than kickstart.nvim (but still manageable)
- Requires more maintenance than LazyVim (but gives you control)
- Larger plugin count than minimal setups (but each serves a purpose)

## 🔧 Development Workflow

### Custom Plugin Development
This setup serves as a testing ground for two custom Neovim plugins in active development:

1. **[amazon-q.nvim](~/dev/personal/amazon-q.nvim)**: Integration with Amazon Q AI assistant
   - Terminal-based chat interface
   - Code context awareness
   - Seamless workflow integration

2. **[script-runner.nvim](~/dev/personal/script-runner.nvim)**: Enhanced script execution and management
   - Project-aware script detection
   - Multiple execution contexts
   - Terminal integration

Both plugins are designed to integrate seamlessly with this configuration and demonstrate how custom tooling can enhance the development experience.

### Project Structure Support
- **Automatic Node version switching** with .nvmrc files
- **Project-specific configurations** via .nvim.lua files
- **Git integration** with LazyGit and gitsigns
- **Testing support** with various test runners

## 📦 Dependencies

### Required
- **Neovim** (>= 0.9.0)
- **Git**
- **Node.js** (via NVM)
- **Starship** (`brew install starship`)
- **FZF** (`brew install fzf`)

### Optional but Recommended
- **LazyGit** (`brew install lazygit`)
- **Ripgrep** (`brew install ripgrep`) - for better grep performance
- **fd** (`brew install fd`) - for better file finding
- **Terraform** (`brew install terraform`)
- **AWS CLI** (`brew install awscli`)

## 🎯 Design Philosophy

### Developer Experience
- **Comprehensive autocompletion**: Tab completion everywhere possible
- **Modern tooling**: Latest and greatest development tools
- **AI Integration**: Built-in AI assistance for coding tasks

### Maintainability
- **Modular configuration**: Easy to modify and extend
- **Clear organization**: Each plugin in its own file
- **Documentation**: Well-documented keymaps and configurations

### Neovim Startup
- **Lazy loading**: Plugins load on-demand
- **Optimized rtp**: Disabled unnecessary runtime plugins
- **Fast completion**: Blink.cmp for sub-millisecond completion

## 🛠️ Customization

### Adding New Plugins
1. Create a new file in `lua/plugins/`
2. Follow the existing pattern with proper lazy loading
3. Add keymaps and configuration as needed

### Modifying Shell Behavior
- Edit `.zshrc` for shell configuration
- Add private variables to `.zshrc.secrets`
- Customize Starship prompt with `~/.config/starship.toml`

### Extending Neovim
- Add new plugins in `lua/plugins/`
- Modify keymaps in `lua/config/keymaps.lua`
- Adjust options in `lua/config/options.lua`

## 📝 Notes

- **Secrets management**: Private environment variables in `.zshrc.secrets`
- **Cross-platform**: Configurations work on macOS and Linux
- **Regular updates**: Plugin versions locked but regularly updated
- **Community driven**: Based on best practices from the Neovim community

Commit message:

plugin disabling and cleanup. eventual removal coming :D

README.md, after:

hello world

hello world

# Personal Dotfiles

A modern, performance-optimized development environment setup featuring a blazing-fast shell configuration and a modular Neovim setup.

## 🚀 Quick Setup

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone <your-repo-url> ~/.dotfiles

# Link configurations
ln -sf ~/.dotfiles/.zshrc ~/.zshrc
ln -sf ~/.dotfiles/nvim ~/.config/nvim

# Install dependencies
brew install starship fzf
```

## 📁 Repository Structure

```
~/.dotfiles/
├── .zshrc                      # Optimized Zsh configuration with Starship
├── .zshrc.secrets              # Private environment variables (gitignored)
├── nvim/                       # Neovim configuration
│   ├── init.lua                # Main entry point
│   ├── lazy-lock.json          # Plugin version lockfile
│   └── lua/
│       ├── config/             # Core Neovim configuration
│       │   ├── options.lua     # Vim settings and options
│       │   ├── keymaps.lua     # Global keymaps
│       │   └── autocmds.lua    # Autocommands
│       └── plugins/            # Individual plugin configurations
│           ├── lsp.lua         # Language Server Protocol setup
│           ├── telescope.lua   # Fuzzy finder configuration
│           ├── completion.lua  # Autocompletion setup
│           ├── treesitter.lua  # Syntax highlighting
│           ├── dashboard.lua   # Start screen
│           ├── avante.lua      # AI coding assistant
│           ├── dap.lua         # Debug Adapter Protocol
│           └── ...             # 25+ other plugin configs
└── README.md                   # This file
```

## ⚡ Shell Configuration (.zshrc)

### Key Features
- **NVM with .nvmrc auto-switching**: Automatically switches Node versions
- **Comprehensive autocompletion**: AWS CLI, Terraform, Git, npm, and more
- **FZF integration**: Fuzzy finding for files and command history
- **Amazon Q integration**: Built-in AI assistant support

### Tools & Completions
- **AWS CLI**: Full autocompletion support
- **Terraform**: Command and resource completion
- **Git**: Full command completion (no aliases - using LazyGit instead)
- **Node/npm/bun**: Package and script completion
- **Tenv**: Terraform version management

## 🎨 Neovim Configuration

### Philosophy: Custom LazyVim-Inspired Setup

This is a **custom Neovim configuration** inspired by [LazyVim](https://lazyvim.org) but built from the ground up for complete control and transparency. 

**Why custom instead of LazyVim?**
- 🎯 **Full control**: Every plugin and setting is explicit and customizable
- 🔍 **Transparency**: No hidden configurations or magic - you see exactly what's loaded
- ⚡ **Performance**: Only the features you actually use, no bloat
- 🛠️ **Maintainability**: Individual plugin files make debugging and modifications easier
- 🎨 **Aesthetics**: Preserves LazyVim's beautiful UI (dashboard, noice, etc.) without the framework overhead

### Architecture
Modern Neovim setup using **Lazy.nvim** plugin manager with individual plugin files for better organization and maintainability. Each plugin is configured in its own file, making the setup modular and easy to understand.

### Core Features

#### 🎯 Language Support
- **LSP Integration**: Full Language Server Protocol support
- **Autocompletion**: Fast completion with blink.cmp
- **Syntax Highlighting**: TreeSitter for accurate highlighting
- **Code Formatting**: Conform.nvim with multiple formatters
- **Debugging**: DAP (Debug Adapter Protocol) support

#### 🔍 Navigation & Search
- **Telescope**: Fuzzy finder for files, symbols, and more
- **Neo-tree**: Modern file explorer
- **Which-key**: Interactive keybinding hints
- **Trouble**: Beautiful diagnostics and quickfix lists

#### 🤖 AI Integration
- **Amazon Q**: Integrated development assistant with beautiful sidebar UI
- **Custom plugin**: Built specifically for this configuration
- **AWS-aware**: Understands AWS services and best practices

#### 🛠️ Development Tools
- **LazyGit**: Terminal UI for Git operations
- **Terminal**: Integrated terminal management
- **Script Runner**: Custom plugin for running project scripts
- **Session Management**: Automatic session persistence

#### 🎨 UI & Aesthetics
- **Kanagawa**: Beautiful colorscheme
- **Lualine**: Customizable statusline
- **Bufferline**: Enhanced buffer/tab management
- **Dashboard**: Personalized start screen
- **Noice**: Enhanced UI for messages and notifications

### Key Keymaps

#### Leader Key: `<Space>`

**File Operations**
- `<leader>ff` - Find files
- `<leader>fg` - Live grep
- `<leader>fb` - Find buffers
- `<leader>w` - Save file

**LSP & Coding**
- `gd` - Go to definition
- `gr` - Go to references
- `<leader>rn` - Rename symbol
- `<leader>ca` - Code actions
- `<leader>f` - Format buffer

**Git**
- `<leader>gg` - Open LazyGit
- `<leader>gs` - Git status
- `<leader>gb` - Git blame

**AI Assistant**
- `<leader>aa` - Toggle Amazon Q sidebar
- `<leader>ac` - Amazon Q with context
- `<leader>as` - Amazon Q simple chat
- `<leader>av` - Add selection to context (visual mode)

**Navigation**
- `<C-h/j/k/l>` - Window navigation
- `<C-e>` - Toggle file tree
- `<leader>xx` - Toggle trouble

## 📊 Configuration Comparison

### Custom vs LazyVim vs Kickstart.nvim

| Feature | This Setup | LazyVim | Kickstart.nvim |
|---------|------------|---------|----------------|
| **Philosophy** | LazyVim-inspired, full control | Opinionated distribution | Minimal starting point |
| **Plugin Count** | ~25 explicit plugins | 50+ plugins (many hidden) | ~8 essential plugins |
| **Startup Time** | Fast (lazy loading) | Fast (lazy loading) | Fastest (minimal) |
| **Transparency** | ✅ Every plugin visible | ❌ Many plugins hidden | ✅ Everything explicit |
| **Customization** | ✅ Full control | ⚠️ Limited without overrides | ✅ Full control |
| **Maintenance** | ✅ Individual files | ❌ Framework updates | ✅ Manual updates |
| **Learning Curve** | Medium | Low | High |

### Feature Matrix

| Feature | This Setup | LazyVim | Kickstart.nvim |
|---------|:----------:|:-------:|:--------------:|
| **LSP Integration** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| **Autocompletion** | ✅ blink.cmp | ✅ nvim-cmp | ✅ nvim-cmp |
| **Fuzzy Finding** | ✅ Telescope | ✅ Telescope | ✅ Telescope |
| **File Explorer** | ✅ Neo-tree | ✅ Neo-tree | ❌ |
| **Git Integration** | ✅ LazyGit + gitsigns | ✅ LazyGit + gitsigns | ✅ gitsigns only |
| **Debugging (DAP)** | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
| **Testing** | ✅ Neotest | ✅ Neotest | ❌ |
| **AI Integration** | ✅ **Amazon Q only** | ✅ Copilot/Codeium/Supermaven | ❌ |
| **Beautiful UI** | ✅ Dashboard + Noice | ✅ Dashboard + Noice | ❌ |
| **Terminal** | ✅ Integrated | ✅ Integrated | ❌ |
| **Session Management** | ✅ Persistence | ✅ Persistence | ❌ |
| **Keybinding Hints** | ✅ Which-key | ✅ Which-key | ❌ |
| **Statusline** | ✅ Lualine | ✅ Lualine | ❌ |
| **Buffer Management** | ✅ Bufferline | ✅ Bufferline | ❌ |
| **Code Formatting** | ✅ Conform | ✅ Conform | ✅ |
| **Syntax Highlighting** | ✅ Treesitter | ✅ Treesitter | ✅ |

### Why This Approach?

**Advantages over LazyVim:**
- 🔍 **Complete transparency**: See exactly what's installed and configured
- 🎛️ **Granular control**: Modify any aspect without fighting the framework
- 📚 **Learning opportunity**: Understand how each piece works
- 🎨 **Aesthetic preservation**: Keep the beautiful UI without the hidden complexity
- ⚡ **Performance**: Only load what you actually need
- 🤖 **Amazon Q integration**: Focused AI assistance with AWS expertise (not available in LazyVim)

**Advantages over Kickstart.nvim:**
- 🎨 **Rich UI**: Beautiful dashboard, notifications, and interface elements
- 🛠️ **Feature complete**: Debugging, testing, AI integration out of the box
- 💼 **Professional setup**: Ready for serious development work
- 🔧 **Advanced tooling**: Git UI, terminal integration, session management

**Trade-offs:**
- More complex than kickstart.nvim (but still manageable)
- Requires more maintenance than LazyVim (but gives you control)
- Larger plugin count than minimal setups (but each serves a purpose)

## 🔧 Development Workflow

### Custom Plugin Development
This setup serves as a testing ground for two custom Neovim plugins in active development:

1. **[amazon-q.nvim](~/dev/personal/amazon-q.nvim)**: Integration with Amazon Q AI assistant
   - Terminal-based chat interface
   - Code context awareness
   - Seamless workflow integration

2. **[script-runner.nvim](~/dev/personal/script-runner.nvim)**: Enhanced script execution and management
   - Project-aware script detection
   - Multiple execution contexts
   - Terminal integration

Both plugins are designed to integrate seamlessly with this configuration and demonstrate how custom tooling can enhance the development experience.

### Project Structure Support
- **Automatic Node version switching** with .nvmrc files
- **Project-specific configurations** via .nvim.lua files
- **Git integration** with LazyGit and gitsigns
- **Testing support** with various test runners

## 📦 Dependencies

### Required
- **Neovim** (>= 0.9.0)
- **Git**
- **Node.js** (via NVM)
- **Starship** (`brew install starship`)
- **FZF** (`brew install fzf`)

### Optional but Recommended
- **LazyGit** (`brew install lazygit`)
- **Ripgrep** (`brew install ripgrep`) - for better grep performance
- **fd** (`brew install fd`) - for better file finding
- **Terraform** (`brew install terraform`)
- **AWS CLI** (`brew install awscli`)

## 🎯 Design Philosophy

### Developer Experience
- **Comprehensive autocompletion**: Tab completion everywhere possible
- **Modern tooling**: Latest and greatest development tools
- **AI Integration**: Built-in AI assistance for coding tasks

### Maintainability
- **Modular configuration**: Easy to modify and extend
- **Clear organization**: Each plugin in its own file
- **Documentation**: Well-documented keymaps and configurations

### Neovim Startup
- **Lazy loading**: Plugins load on-demand
- **Optimized rtp**: Disabled unnecessary runtime plugins
- **Fast completion**: Blink.cmp for sub-millisecond completion

## 🛠️ Customization

### Adding New Plugins
1. Create a new file in `lua/plugins/`
2. Follow the existing pattern with proper lazy loading
3. Add keymaps and configuration as needed

### Modifying Shell Behavior
- Edit `.zshrc` for shell configuration
- Add private variables to `.zshrc.secrets`
- Customize Starship prompt with `~/.config/starship.toml`

### Extending Neovim
- Add new plugins in `lua/plugins/`
- Modify keymaps in `lua/config/keymaps.lua`
- Adjust options in `lua/config/options.lua`

## 📝 Notes

- **Secrets management**: Private environment variables in `.zshrc.secrets`
- **Cross-platform**: Configurations work on macOS and Linux
- **Regular updates**: Plugin versions locked but regularly updated
- **Community driven**: Based on best practices from the Neovim community
